---
title: "Adventure Time: season 1"
excerpt: "We jump back to 2008, to watch one of the most influential cartoons in the last decade."
layout: article
categories:
 - livereads
 - adventure-time
tags:
- adventure time
---
In 2007, a short pilot episode aired that could easily have been dismissed as some wacky nonsense (and probably was), but it caught the animation of us millenials or whoever. Three years later, it became a cartoon - notable for its fast pace, unique art style and unusual idioms and a kind of odd internal logic underlying the wackiness.

Drawing from old-school roleplaying games and post-apocalyptic fiction, _Adventure Time_ probably started the recent comeback of cartoons with a huge secondary audience of ~nerdy~ university students. It's inspired a _ton_ of shows, of which _Steven Universe_ is probably the most famous but also stuff like _Bravest Warriors_, _Infinity Train_, and _Danger and Eggs_, and you could also make a good case for shows like _Gravity Falls_ and _Over The Garden Wall_ having at least a similar target audience and sense of humour even if they stylistically diverged. I'm probably missing an awful lot!

In its later seasons, _Adventure Time_ turned from wacky humour to favour of longer-term plots, character arcs and a suitably complicated internal mythology for people who like wikis and lore videos, as well as getting increasingly experimental in terms of animation. Most recently it's turned away from the most out there experimental episodes for long multi-episode 'miniseries' such as _Stakes_, _Islands_ and _Elements_.

Anyway yeah like you probably know all that if you're reading some girl on the internet review every adventure time episode.

At time of posting, there are: a pilot, 278 main series episodes, a DVD-only short, four online episodes, five 'frog seasons' episodes, and as of a few days ago, a minecraft crossover episode with a different studio. So we're gonna be going a while.

But lets head back to the simpler times of season 1, when there was no question of ancient artefacts, the apocalyptic war was a background detail, and nobody knew who Simon was. At this point, Finn's still very much a kid, there to have adventures.

It's worth noting that there are really rather a lot of episode numbering schemes here. For example, early on _Adventure Time_ episodes aired in back to back pairs, which would get treated as one 22 minute episode. So one way of counting, Season 1 has 13 episodes; another way, 26. We're going to be following the numbering scheme used by Wikipedia, where each episode number corresponds to one 11-minute segment.

## The pilot

Well before we even meet Finn, let's check out Pen, and the pilot episode that lays out the basic elements of the show. You can watch it [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wT2HlE1W01E) (not the best video quality admittedly, but the production values were much lower back then anyway).

The 'internal logic' has not really come into being at this point: it's more a kind of 2000s-internet 'lolrandom' humour - I think what makes it work later on is that they stick to the joke and just kind of use those things, uncommented on, as the basis for future events; sure, Lady Rainicorn speaks Korean, that's just how it is. (In fact, in this episode, Lady Rainicorn does not yet speak Korean, but makes high pitched trills.)

Anyway, the plot is: in the first minute, Jake connects to the internet with his mind, and him and Finn do a silly dance. ~~Finn~~ Pen is even more prone to dramatic exclamations - including, already, 'Algebraic!' - and I think he has a different voice actor. Then Rainicorn shows up: at this point, she belongs to Princess Bubblegum, apparently. They follow her, and find the Ice King - already 'always kidnapping princesses' - has kidnapped PB!

The kind of 'bendable tube' animation style that would [later become established](https://www.scribd.com/document/14686737/How-to-Draw-Adventure-Time) is at this point only partly in effect. The character still bend and move in arcs but they're less strict about 3D forms I guess?

Anyway a lot of the points of the future show are already here, or become established in this episode. The kind of weird subtextual implied sexual violence of the Ice King kidnapping princesses to make them marry him is here - later on they try and tone that down as much as possible and the Ice King much more sympathetic as a character, but here he's just a wacky villain. Jake and Rainicorn hit it off, and they will ultimately be married in the show of course!

Finn's characterisation is... well he's a twelve year old kid lol. It's interesting to see him without the character development he gets in later seasons.

One of the most awkward elements of the pilot is that Finn's mind gets projected to Mars, where he meets Abraham Lincoln (who tells him to believe in himself). This is, I think, the only time a real historical figure was used by the show; he actually sticks around, appearing briefly in other episodes that touch on Mars, but this is one element I definitely imagine they regretted.

The biggest victim of pilot-characterisation, though, is Princess Bubblegum. Here, there's _nothing_ of the sweet but not so secretly authoritarian, scientific genius and political leader we later know; she's nothing but a damsel in distress; Finn rescues her and she rewards him with a kiss.

I think if Adventure Time ended up resembling its pilot too much, it would just suck! But what makes it work is that they take this wobbly premise (all the basic elements and many of the core characters, with the prominent exception of Marceline, are here) and elaborate on it and complicate it to the point of absurdity - but a kind of absurdity that makes a weird sort of sense.

## Season 1
### Episode 1: _Slumber Party Panic_
So it's three years later, and the team has a real budget now. Which means: detailed backgrounds, competent voice actors, way more characters...

This episode introduces the Candy Kingdom, ruled by Princess Bubblegum, in the form of a zombie story! A bunch of minor characters make their first appearances.

One thing I noticed going back is there is a lot of innuendo in this episode I don't remember, from the zombie going 'give me some sugar baby', Finn referring to Tree Trunks's 'hot buns' (actual buns in the bread sense in a joke that reminds me of that _Wallace & Gromit_ movie), Mr. Cupcake stripping off... sometimes these kinds of jokes are said to be for parents (since they'll fly over kids' heads), but I think maybe they're already aware of that student demographic?

The frenetic pace of this show is already in evidence. More events are packed into these ten minutes than some movies, I think. That's probably one of the things that really won this show popularity.

The idea of the 'royal promise', and the reality-altering powers of the Gumball Guardians, is something that's not really revisited that I remember. Unlike later episodes, where Bubblegum is not just the ruler but the creator and almost goddess of the Candy Kingdom, here she seems to have to answer to the Gumball Guardians almost as much as Finn does.

It's an amusing and well-paced episode overall - not a bad season opener.

### Episode 2: _Trouble in Lumpy Space_
Ah, LSP... a fan favourite character. A purple floating girl voiced by Pendleton Ward himself, who seems... if I know my American cultural stereotypes at all (and I kinda don't lol) to be a parody of superficial 'valley girls'; her world is dominated by makeouts with boys, pointless fighting with parents, dismissing other kids as 'smooth posers' and the 'promcoming' dance, and she's endlessly rude and contrary. So, it's a kind of self-aware joke about teenagers, aimed at those same teenagers, I guess? Combined with some grossout humour.

There's something uncomfortable about the way they have a guy do the 'silly voices' for me as a trans girl on some level, but it's not that bad.

There are some amusing bait-and-switch jokes in this episode about the tension between whether 'lumpiness' is really so terrible - Finn acting like Jake is asking him to kill him if the 'lumpiness' infection catches, the whole sequence with Finn and Jake trying to get each other to sit on the antidote or not, but overall, it's kinda eh.

### Episode 3: _Prisoners of Love_
This is the Ricardo episode, right? *watches...*

...no, I guess that comes later. This is the episode that establishes the 'Ice King kidnaps and threatens princesses into subtextually sexual relationships' dynamic in the show proper. It's... messy.

Most of the Ice King's basic character is already well established here: he's a sad lonely guy who treats women abusively and threatens violence to get them to give him affection. I think they are trying to teach a lesson to kids or something: they straight up have Ice King get told he's a sociopath by the Cosmic Owl. Whether the lesson would actually be clear to someone who's internalised some of those ideas, or whether he'd just seem wacky, isn't clear.

This is the first episode where we meet some of the many, many princesses who will become recurring characters: notably, Slime Princess and Wildberry Princess are named. LSP is here too. They still play much the same role that PB did in the pilot: Finn rescues them (though they at least play some part in their own rescue? I guess?) and then Slime Princess offers him a kiss.

There's a recurring thing here where women are affectionate with Finn and he gets extremely embarassed and uncomfortable. Because he's twelve, of course! I'm not sure why they keep hammering this plot point.

### Episode 4: _Tree Trunks_
Tree trunks! Another fan favourite character, and one who gets a pretty major role, forms a relationship, raises the baby!Lich... but all that comes later.

This episode serves mostly as an introduction episode for Tree Trunks: she's a kindly but somewhat absent-minded old woman (...tiny elephant) who lives in the forest, bakes apple pies, and is oblivious to ill intent from monsters.

There's already some cool weird monster stuff. Finn and Jake encounter a 'wall of flesh', and actually cut one of its arms off! And later on they fight a mass of tentacles (a 'snake armed ruby brain beast' in Finn's words). It's definitely the kind of thing you'd see in old Monster Manuals, and it's one of my favourite aspects of the show's milieu.

Less comfortable is the way this episode treats gender, sexuality and drag. What makes me go 😐 about it is that it's all basically a joke at peoples' expense: Tree Trunks puts on makeup and attempts to seduce the brain beast with her 'womanly charms and elephant prowess', and later on Finn and Jake wear makeup. The joke is that men/old people are doing this, how uncomfortable. But eh. I feel like the industry has come a long way since 2010 and I am not gonna get too upset this one.

One thing I'm very grateful for is that _Adventure Time_ has no laugh tracks, or even any significant pause for you to take in one joke. Even if things are intended as jokes, you don't necessarily have to take them that way. I can pretend that in Ooo, gender norms are more relaxed or something... it's bullshit and not true but whatever.

I doubt they had any plans to make Tree Trunks a recurring character in this episode. At the end of the episode, she bites a crystal apple and gets transported into some kind of crystal dimension: the episode cuts off abruptly, and by the next episode, there's no mention of it. This will, in fact, be followed up much _much_ later.

### Episode 5: _The Enchiridion!_

This episode introduces what will be a major part of the early season plot - it's kind of interesting to look back and see how what, when I first watched it, seemed like zany, disconnected events will end up part of a sprawling plot later.

"This party is sooo crazy!" is spoken in this episode; later on it will be used as a sample on the Frederator (the studio that makes _Adventure Time_) jingle. Which is interesting to note!

Cinnamon Bun, the candy person whose job is to be embarassing and 'dumb' and fail at everything, is introduced here. Later on I think they kind of rethink this, but for the time being... it's just 'lol what an idiot'.

Finn rescues PB from a contrived situation, she congratulates him for being his hero... it's rather had to reconcile this Princess Bubblegum with the ancient 'candy elemental' who constructed a nation of artificial people. She seems a lot less mature. Perhaps she's playing it up for the 12-year-old kid here... anyway she sends Finn after a book about being a 'hero', called the Enchiridion.

There's a weird thing where every episode so far has found an excuse for a title drop or near-title drop, accompanied by a title card.

So to obtain the Enchiridion, Finn must face a series of contrived challenges about being a hero, like he rescues a group of imps who immediately start repeatedly 'destroying old ladies' (of course, illusory) to create an absurdly exaggerated moral dilemma, putting Finn into a crisis of confidence. I get that it's supposed to be a kind of parody, but it feels kinda flat to me: sort of trying to have its cake (a story of Finn being challenged in 'being a hero') and eat it (by making all his challenges deliberately so contrived as to be impossible to take seriously).

The 'unaligned ant' was pretty funny though.

I should probably say something about Mannish Man the Manly Minotaur but... the idea of doing so just makes me feel exhausted. This motif - combining hyperexaggerated masculinity and minotaurs - was, oddly, paralleled in _Gravity Falls_.

_Fuck_ manliness tho.

### Episode 6: _The Jiggler_

I think I remember this being a particularly memorable episode... it's the one with the round thing that looks like Shuckle!

It starts with Finn singing in an autotuned voice, because he swallowed a computer! I don't know if this is just quietly dropped or if we'll see him lose that computer later.

Anyway, the story of this episode is: Finn and Jake acquire a strange little thing they call the Jiggler, which likes to dance, and take it home because it's cute. It's got a really cool design, with little arms poking out of various marked holes and a neat symmetry! So much so that I remember it, so many years later.

This is also the first episode where Finn and Jake's treehouse home is introduced! So that's cool.

I really like that a bunch of weird stuff happens in this episode, but there's an underlying plot logic, and I think some of the visual effects used for the Jiggler are just _brilliant_. The Jiggler is never revisited again, and I kind of feel like that's a shame.

### Episode 8: _Ricardio the Heart Guy_

I don't remember much about this episode but I have a feeling I'm not going to be into it.

It opens with Early Ice King stuff and prodding at the Finn/Princess Bubblegum relationship so I'm already not that into it. (And not just because like, diehard Bubbline... when's Marceline gonna show up anyway!) But the main arc of the episode is a deep-voiced walking heart called Ricardio. Voiced by George Takei! I knew I recognised that voice from somewhere. (Takei seems to like coming in to voice single-episode villains in cartoons huh... he was that prison guard in AtlA, and a clone general in SWTCW...)

Anyway the major thrust of this episode is Ricardio inspiring romantic jealousy in Finn, and the kid not knowing how to deal with it. I can't wait for Finn to grow up some.

"I think he's... a villain." "Why, is it because his face is so foldy and dramatic?" is a cute lampshade. Hanging lampshades is basically this episode's shtick though. Naturally it has a series of twists; the ultimate resolution is that Ricardio is the Ice King's accidentally-animated heart, and he wants to extract and sexually assault Princess Bubblegum's heart which is uh... eesh.

I don't even know what to make of this episode. I think they later come round to acknoledging how little Finn/PB works as a dynamic (I guess that's kind of the intent all along because Finn is super immature). But it's not that fun to watch a 12-year-old boy be really exaggeratedly awkward and 12?

I wonder what kids tend to make of this episode. 

### Episode 9: _Business Time_

This episode starts to touch on the show's post-apocalyptic setting a little bit more explicitly.

But mostly it's... a parable about capitalism or something?

Finn and Jake find some zombie(?) businessmen in an iceberg and, when they beg to be hired, take advantage of their skills to become more efficient at their everyday adventuring. But, they defer more and more to the businessmen, and become 'fat and lazy', only to discover that the businessmen are kidnapping people with a giant robot to keep them 'safe'. 'Happiness is not a priority' is perhaps the closest the show comes to making its point explicit? Which is, if you squint, a vaguely Marxian metaphor for the productive forces unleashed by capitalism.

_Vaguely_.

The show's use of fat is... hmm. Like it's 'lol fat = lazy' on the one hand, but also, neither Finn nor Jake seem particularly upset to be fat, Jake even says he'd miss it. It's depression to consider whether the same comments would have been possible with female main characters.

### Episode 10: _My Two Favorite People_

This episode is for once focussing not on Finn, or a side character, but on Jake! Specifically on his immaturity lol.

More specifically, Jake in this episode is torn between spending time with his girlfriend, Lady Rainicorn, who now speaks Korean (no subtitles are provided! but fans have helpfully translated her dialogue [here](http://adventuretime.wikia.com/wiki/Lady_Rainicorn/Quotes)), and having wacky adventures with Finn.

This is also the introduction of Shelby the worm! A character who will recur throughout the show... I can't believe Shelby was introduced before Marceline. Anyway Shelby suggests that Jake hang out with both at the same time, and Jake ends up the third wheel.

Watching this episode with the Korean translations alongside definitely really adds a lot.

There's a kind of uncomfortable bit in this where Rainicorn gets a translator with a bunch of silly voices, and they settle on 'old man', leading to immediate misgendering and Jake expressing discomfort. It's... hmm. I don't remember there being so much of this.

There's some good lines in this episode. "I can't take them off... I guess they're cursed. Still pretty cool though!"

Oh, and then we get Tiffany. I remember this being bad... but eeesh that transmisogyny. Scare chord, Jake shouting "Tiffany's... a boy!", Tiffany spinning round to reveal a moustache.

I don't want to make too much of a thing about it because like I remember when everyone (me included) got pissed off at a similar sight gag in _Steven Universe_ and in retrospect that whole affair was way too over the top discourse for a cartoon we were way too invested in, but I do wish cartoons wouldn't do that.

Anyway there's like... I hesitate to even call it this but basically there's a kind of gay subtext: Finn leaps on Tiffany calling him a homewrecker when Jake calls him his best friend. But it's like, played for a joke. And ends with Finn spitting on Tiffany.

What a crap ending to an amusing opener, to be honest. Tiffany will ultimately be back - though hopefully not with the gender variance played for laughs again.

"I love you _because_ you're an idiot... you make me feel like a genius" I realise this is just a spin on the 'idiot man, put-upon wife' thing but it was amusing.

### Episode 11: _Memories of Boom Boom Mountain_

This episode is kinda... forgettable. Toilet humour, 'lol hypermasculinity', idk.

Finn decides to help a mountain guy who's upset that some viking-ish dudes are constantly 'roughhousing', due to a traumatic experience when nobody helped him when he was younger.

One thing I'm noticing is that, while not nearly so explicitly about teaching a 'friendship lesson' as say, MLPFIM, this show is actually quite didactic at this point. In this case I guess it's about setting clear boundaries and knowing when you're able to help people, balancing conflicting needs, that kinda thing. Or like, not getting caught up in someone's hangups... less charitably, "some people are just crazy and can't be helped".

Anyway Adventure Time takes it in the direction of absurdity, as usual. So you get like vikings punching each other with farm animals strapped to their fists. Then they end up petting each other... bloody hell this is homoerotic! ...anyway the resolution is that through a contrived series of Rube Goldberg like arrangements Finn really can solve everybody's problems. I guess this is continuing the trend of 'set up for an obvious moral lesson, subvert it'?

This is also the first appearance of Jake's parents. So that's a thing.

### Episode 12: _Wizard_

This is where we really get the 'sorcery' side of those sword & sorcery influences. Things get kinda Jack Vance in here. But hopefully with less misogyny lol.

The art style is... kinda different? A little bit sketchier?

Finn and Jake go on an interdimensional adventure thanks to uh... a skeleton in a robe offering free magic. I like interdimensional stuff. There's definitely some cool weird shit: a frog with a bunch of tadpoles inside its mouth in tiny wizard hats. I liked the gag about speaking in unison.

Finn freaks out because his robe is like a dress... accept in, Finn. The power of forced femme compels you...

Anyway Finn and Jake gain a bunch of wizard powers that are never mentioned again (possibly they're implied to lose them at the end of the episode) and save a scam wizard temple from an asteroid. So that's a thing.

_Adventure Time_ will come back to the subject of wizards much later, in a different way.

### Episode 13: _Evicted_

Ohhhh boyyy... it's time...

Marceline's episode! I'm so excited. Finn and Jake may be the protagonists, but Marceline and PB really make the show worth watching.

Anyway she makes a great introduction. I think this is the first time the world is referred to as Ooo as well. Also first mention of the Fire Kingdom! I should probably stop keep track of first mentions. That's what wikis are for.

This episode is about... squatters' rights? Marceline shows up and declares she has title to Finn and Jake's house, and kicks them out. Then does it again. The resolution is... Marceline decides to give them the house. Which kind of fits the general tone.

Like all the characters in this show, Marceline takes time to grow into her full characterisation I guess! She's still pretty fun here. I'm glad she's in the show.

It also has a song. Apparently it is sung by Pendleton Ward and Olivia Olson, the voice of Marceline.

### Episode 14: _City of Thieves_

This is another non-sequitur episode (except in terms of dealing with the general theme of Finn having grand ideas of being a good hero). Finn & Jake find a dead turtle and a tree woman warns them they'll turn into thieves if they go there. But they go in anyway to find flowers for a kid. OK.

This episode has some cute slapstick animations of all the dozens of different thieves stealing from each other. It's kinda fun.

Penny's inevitably a thief herself, taking advantage of them. I rather like her in fact. I don't remember her coming back but I hope she does!

### Episode 15: _The Witch's Garden_

I don't remember this episode at all and I can kind of see why. Jake gets his magic powers stripped by a witch, which means his lower half is like... a human baby? There's a weird bit where Jake suggests he had a lot more nipples before.

There's a skeleton 'mermaid' harpy thing who explicitly invites Finn and Jake to 'mate' with her? How did I miss all this stuff before...

At some point hopefully the show will get some other idea than setting up for a moral lesson then immediately twisting or undermining it. It's getting kinda predictable.

### Episode 16: _What is life?_

Finn and Jake get into a prank war. Which means... it's time to introduce NEPTR! Which means NEPTR is introduced before BMO gets characterisation as anything other than a games console...

I think this is also the first time a penguin is referred to as Gunther.

The balloons... holy shit. I was not ready for "Your blood oath is fulfilled." "Yaaaay! To the mesosphere! Finally, we can die!"

It's funny... though NEPTR is a recurring character later, I actually totally forgot the events of this episode. It seems a strange basis for a recurring character, but that's true in general for this show's characters lol.

One thing they're underlining in this episode is that Ice King doesn't just crave romance (which the show's made pretty clear he's barely able to conceptualise), but any kind of human connection at all.

### Episode 17: _Ocean of Fear_

This one starts with a dramatic, purpose-prosey quote about fear from someone called Pat McHale. Who's that? It turns out, the creative director of _Adventure Time_ itself. Heh.

I can't wait til they stop doing so many fart jokes.

I vaguely remember this episode, where Finn confronts the manifestation of his fear of the ocean. I don't remember the resolution.

Anyway I guess this is about exposure therapy and the danger of 'flooding' (in perhaps a rather literal sense). Jake basically attempts to treat Finn's fear of the ocean by taking him out to sea when he's asleep and waterboarding him. Predictably, it does not go well.

Nearly every episode has had its hyper-exaggerated, detailed faces but this one seems to have particularly many...

### Episode 18: _When Wedding Bells Thaw_

Oh boy, this sounds like an Ice King episode! Let's hope it's not too uncomfortable. (It's gonna be pretty uncomfortable.) How long until _Simon and Marcie_ again?

Ice King comes to Finn and Jake's house. They attack on sight, but Finn loses... then Ice King reveals he's marrying 'someone who wants to marry me!' and he's demanding they throw him a ~~stag~~ 'manlorette' party.

This does seem to be where the Party Bears come in. Huh, I thought they had their own episode.

Anyway cue a montage where Ice King pisses people off and freezes them in various bars and clubs... of course I'm gonna guess now (halfway into the ep) that Ice King isn't actually getting married, he just wants to trick or cajole Finn and Jake into hanging out with him. ...OK not just that, instead they end up trying to persude him to marry, only to discover the 'marriage' is coerced after all.

I think they're already setting up for his redemption arc and transition from 'villain' to 'friend' (though he's certainly not very far down that road in this episode) - I guess that was planned from really early on. But, that still means lots of eps of Ice King going on about capturing 'hot princesses' and 'girls', and I know it's like, a parody of misogynist 'heroic fantasy' genre conventions, but eeeeesh.

Given that 'forcing people to marry' is basically a PG way of talking about sexual violence, the sooner this passes the better.

