---
title: "Let’s read Umineko! - episode 5 - chapter 5"
layout: article
categories:
 - livereads
 - umineko
 - ep5
tags:
 - umineko
excerpt: in which we pull the gacha
---
Hey, we're back! Comments from the last ep:

> <b class="name">anarchistserum:</b> I’m glad you lived to meet Erika! I love her so much, even when she’s polite enough to be a bit dull.

I'm also glad I lived! Here's to not dying stupidly on a roundabout.

Looking forward to seeing Erika in action...

As it happens, I missed it last time, but there is an additional page on the Witch Side character screen for Erika:

Furudo Erika
: > <span class="smallcaps">Bernkastel</span>'s double and servant. Also a piece who has manifested in the human world.
  >
  > Because she is human, she cannot use magic and the like. However, because she is in contact with <span class="name">Bernkastel</span> in a higher world and can appeal to her to use higher-world miracles and authority on her behalf, it would probably be no exaggeration to call Furudo Erika a human capable of wielding the power of a witch.
  >
  > Therefore, even though she is an outsider to the Ushiromiya family, she possesses the right to demand full attention from everyone when speaking, the right to advance proceedings, and the right to investigate the crime scene before the police arrive, as well as many other special abilities.
  >
  > She gets pleasure from the process of solving riddles, but her greatest joy comes from using that victory to sneer at others.

So it seems this is not simply a puppet for <span class="smallcaps">Bernkastel</span>, but a character in her own right!

---

Dinner time! Gohda serves up. Everyone's all 'wow Erika is so calm and composed and good at eating formal dinners'. Hideyoshi tries to put her at ease and...

{% include figure.html src="embed/umineko/ep5/21-self-respecting.webp" alt="Erika: ............You just have to start on the outside and work your way in. ......If that's too much trouble, then just ask for some chopsticks. ......Any self‐respecting Japanese would use chopsticks." capt="Hideyoshi tries to put her at ease by joking about the cutlery and she says this. Japanese for the last sentence: 日本人ならお箸です---literally 'if \[you're\] a Japanese person, \[use\] chopsticks'." %}

She gets *really excited* talking about chopsticks.

> <b class="name">Erika:</b> Simply pour it into a bowl donburi‐style. Is there anyone who eats gyuudon with a spoon? Of course not. We Japanese must unwaveringly, unfailingly, unflinchingly use chopsticks! So, Gohda‐san. If you please, I would like some chopsticks. I shall show everyone the proud and proper way for a Japanese person to eat!

Damn, I'd rather not know what Erika thinks about, say, Korean people at this rate...

The narration assures us that she's this all for the bit, and she endears herself to the adults even more with her splendid table manners. Yeah, given that the narrator here is pretty much <span class="smallcaps">Bernkastel</span>'s girlfriend, I feel like she's laying it on a bit thick!

Dinner is pretty chill with Erika present. The kids, now plus Erika, head back to the guest house to play cards. The term in Japanese is <ruby lang="ja">トランプ<rp>, </rp><rt>turanpu</rt></ruby>, literally 'trump', but apparently this is just the term for Western-style playing cards in Japan! (As opposed to [Hanafuda](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hanafuda) I guess.) That's pretty interesting. [Japanese Wikipedia](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E3%83%88%E3%83%A9%E3%83%B3%E3%83%97) isn't super specific on the etymology, just saying that in English it refers to a variety of games with the trump card mechanic.

They pass the portrait of <span class="smallcaps">Beatrice</span>, which grabs Erika's attention, so Rudolf explains the whole legend of the gold thing to her. We get a new background for the guest house, showing some golf clubs.

{% include figure.html src="embed/umineko/ep5/22-golf-zone.webp" alt="A view of a brick wall, on which is mounted a set of golf clubs in a wooden rack and two light sconces." capt="I'm putting in random new backgrounds and such because taking pictures of the same talksprites on the same backgrounds gets kinda stale haha..." %}

Erika jumps to the conclusion that solving the ritual will bestow head status, which puts the shits up the relatives a bit. She points out that the intended audience must be confined to people in the mansion; also the amount of gold is 'tantamount to' inheriting the Ushiromiya family's wealth. She then pats herself on the back for this observation...

> <b class="name">Erika:</b> .........All it takes is the presence of that epitaph, and a deduction like this becomes trivial for Furudo Erika. ......Your thoughts, ladies and gentlemen?" 

I see, so this is what her quirk will be... I'm sure Lucifer, as the stake of pride, is loving this development.

Erika further argues that Kinzo intended to create doubt so Krauss would have a harder time inheriting. She drops the 'All it takes is X, and a deduction like this becomes trivial' line again. Ah, so that's her *catchphrase*. Let's get it in Japanese:

> ……ただXがそこに存在するだけで。古戸ヱリカはこの程度の推理が可能です
>
> <i lang="ja">......tada X ga soko ni sanzai suru dake de. Furudo Erika wa, kono teido no suiri ga kaou desu.</i>

A painfully literal translation might go 'Merely by X existing here... For Furudo Erika, this amount of deduction is possible.' Obvs the Umineko Project version is more idiomatic.

She patronisingly asks Jessica to comment, and Battler observes that Erika is a bit *too* much like an Ushiromiya...

## Riddle solution?

She takes a crack at the riddle. <span class="smallcaps">Bernkastel</span> insults Battler for giving up on it after his previous attempts. All right, Bernie, you know we're not getting the answer til episode 8, so get off your high horse...

Since we're going to be discussing the riddle, here it is again for convenience...

<details markdown="1">
<summary>The epitaph in Japanese and English</summary>

Japanese original:

<blockquote lang="jp">
  <p>懐かしき、故郷を貫く鮎の川。<br>
  黄金郷を目指す者よ、これを下りて鍵を探せ。</p>

  <p>川を下れば、やがて里あり。<br>
  その里にて二人が口にし岸を探れ。<br>
  そこに黄金郷への鍵が眠る。</p>

  <p>鍵を手にせし者は、以下に従いて黄金郷へ旅立つべし。</p>

  <p>第一の晩に、鍵の選びし六人を生贄に捧げよ。<br>
  第二の晩に、残されし者は寄り添う二人を引き裂け。<br>
  第三の晩に、残されし者は誉れ高き我が名を讃えよ。<br>
  第四の晩に、頭をえぐりて殺せ。<br>
  第五の晩に、胸をえぐりて殺せ。<br>
  第六の晩に、腹をえぐりて殺せ。<br>
  第七の晩に、膝をえぐりて殺せ。<br>
  第八の晩に、足をえぐりて殺せ。<br>
  第九の晩に、魔女は蘇り、誰も生き残れはしない。<br>
  第十の晩に、旅は終わり、黄金の郷に至るだろう。</p>

  <p>魔女は賢者を讃え、四つの宝を授けるだろう。<br>
  一つは、黄金郷の全ての黄金。<br>
  一つは、全ての死者の魂を蘇らせ。<br>
  一つは、失った愛すらも蘇らせる。<br>
  一つは、魔女を永遠に眠りにつかせよう。</p>

  <p>安らかに眠れ、我が最愛の魔女ベアトリーチェ。</p>
</blockquote>

Umineko-Project translation:

<blockquote>
  <ol class="poem">
    <li>
      <p>Behold the sweetfish river, running through my beloved home of old.</p>
      <p>You who seek the Golden Land, follow its path downstream in search of the key.</p>
      <ol>
        <li>As you travel down it, you will see a village.</li>
        <li>In that village, look for the shore the two speak of.</li>
        <li>There the key to the Golden Land sleeps.</li>
      </ol>
    </li>

  <li>
    You who laid hand upon the key must journey as follows to the Golden Land.
    <ol>
      <li>On the first twilight, sacrifice the six chosen by the key.</li>
      <li>On the second twilight, those who remain shall tear apart the two who are close.</li>
      <li>On the third twilight, those who remain shall praise my noble name.</li>
      <li>On the fourth twilight, gouge the head and kill.</li>
      <li>On the fifth twilight, gouge the chest and kill.</li>
      <li>On the sixth twilight, gouge the stomach and kill.</li>
      <li>On the seventh twilight, gouge the knee and kill.</li>
      <li>On the eighth twilight, gouge the leg and kill.</li>
      <li>On the ninth twilight, the witch revives, and none shall be left alive.</li>
      <li>On the tenth twilight, the journey ends, and you shall reach the Home of the Gold.</li>
    </ol>
  </li>

  <li>
    The witch shall praise the wise, and bestow four treasures.
    <ol>
      <li>One shall be all of the Golden Land’s gold.</li>
      <li>One resurrects all the dead people’s souls.</li>
      <li>One even revives all the love they possessed.</li>
      <li>And one for the rich to eternally rest.</li>
    </ol>
    Rest in peace, my beloved witch, Beatrice.
    </li>
  </ol>
</blockquote>

</details>

<span class="name">Lambdadelta</span> says that Bernie solved it right then and there... but suggests it might have taken her years. She replies she fished through just 'a few hundred' fragments, and asks Lambda to take her to 'sea' so she can deliver the answer...

{% include figure.html src="embed/umineko/ep5/23-lensflare.webp" alt="Bernkastel and Lambda in an abstract space full of purple clouds. Narration: When I looked, ......I saw that the two witches and I......had been thrown into a pitch black universe." capt="Apparently the 'sea' consists of FBM gradient noise and a super old school lens flare effect! I remember generating effects like that with GIMP on school computers back in the 2000s..." %}

Lambda tells that if Battler wants to feel gravity, he need only believe his feet are on the ground. He manages to stabilise himself. So this is like, an abstraction of unformed fictional space...? Lambda warns that without holding on to 'will (意思), emotions (感情) or form (姿や形)' Battler risks falling into the 'depths of eternity' as mere seaweed...

<span class="smallcaps">Bernkastel</span> then goes and weaves a bunch of fragments together with golden threads to give us a place to solve this riddle. Wow, for all that these witches condescend to Battler, they're not skimping on the spectacle...

As Battler passes through the 'fragments', he glimpses scenes---all from previous games, I'm pretty sure.

Lambda interjects to say that what he glimpsed were not memories, but fragments of *worlds*. We see a scene from the third game, with Eva Beatrice along with the first two stanzas of the epitaph.

> <b class="name smallcaps">Eva Beatrice</b> ...The "beloved home of old" definitely won't betray our expectations. ......The only past that Father held dear was his years as a boy.

Since this led to the solution, this theory must be a correct hint, argues Bernie. And at the time, the characters also observed that it does not refer to Odawara, where he was born.

So, Battler argues, does that mean that Bernie exhaustively considered everywhere Kinzo might possibly have lived? No, she says, she used other hints. Hint 2 is the observation about the sweetfish river, which as it happens I screenshotted during the episode 3 liveblog...

{% include figure.html src="embed/umineko/ep3/190-oddly-insightful.png" alt="Eva Beatrice: Think of a river. A river. Linking it with a ‘family tree’ wasn’t a bad idea. Try thinking about how to link a river with something else along those lines……" capt="Wow, I used to make my screenshots so damn small!" %}

The sweetfish element is a bit of a red herring (HA HA HA), or at least, not meant to be interpreted entirely literally but as another sort of hint. So uh... sweetfish. Hmm. 'Sweetfish' is 鮎, which combines the radical for 'fish', 魚, with a radical 占, which interpreted as a whole kanji would mean 'fortune telling'. Other than that, I'm not sure. What about the range of the [sweetfish](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ayu_sweetfish)?

> Native to East Asia, it is distributed in the northwestern Pacific Ocean along the coast of Hokkaidō in Japan southward to the Korean Peninsula, China, Hong Kong and northern Vietnam. It is amphidromous, moving between coastal marine waters and freshwater lakes and rivers. A few landlocked populations also exist in lakes in Japan such as Lake Biwa. Original wild populations in Taiwan became extinct in 1968 due to pollution and present extant populations were reintroduced from Japan in the 1990s.

In my attempt to solve it in the last episode, I interpreted it as an ocean current. However, perhaps it's more of a culinary thing... I'm not sure what's commonly eaten with sweetfish. Or, with the 'family tree' thing suggested by Eva Beatrice, we could even imagine the cladogram of the fish... and find some related fish. Probably not that one...

There is a line I didn't remember, about how the 'key' is not six characters long, suitable for the linguistic manipulations that Kyrie suggested...

{% include figure.html src="embed/umineko/ep5/24-the-key.webp" alt="Eva: ...But this isn't six characters at all. ......I'm absolutely sure that this is the answer, but this doesn't reach six characters at all...!" %}

But then there is some way of writing it that fits.

So the solution is indeed: find the correct six-character 'key', and a suitable source to delete characters from. Battler reasons that we should read the string 第一の晩 (the first twilight) as the target, and contemplates ways of writing it in English like 'the first twilight' or 'first night'. So, OK, hold on... I was assuming all along that we had to muck around with kanji, but actually this is probably working in *katakana* or even the Latin alphabet?

By that logic, let's consider that the key might be TAIWAN in English (if that is the answer, that is not being a huge genius, 'Kinzo grew up in Taiwan' is a spoiler that I have glimpsed by accident). In Japanese, this is written <ruby lang="ja">台湾<rp>, </rp><rt>taiwan</rt></ruby>, so it's understandable that Eva wouldn't immediately spot the six-character reading. I don't quite know how we could have figured out 'TAIWAN' without the hint about the betel nuts in this episode, but it seems like Erika or <span class="smallcaps">Bernkastel</span> are on the verge of telling us. I'm not sure how that would qualify as a 'village' or a 'shore' though.

However, Battler's suggestions of 'the first twilight' or 'first night' don't have the letter 'A' in them. 

Abruptly we drop back to Erika and Battler discussing the same theory on the game board. Since Kinzo is such a Westaboo, they figure it is probably in English.

Erika then leads them to conclude that the second twilight should be interpreted by separating adjacent pair of characters remains after the first manipulation into the second target. I thought perhaps ought to insert the rest in between them, for 'those who remain'? But that's not where they go with it.

OK, I think we'd better pause the explanation here, that feels like more than enough hint to solve it. Supposing that the 'key' solution to the first part of the riddle is TAIWAN, we need to figure out what we're deleting characters from, and this time we'll assume that we need to work in *English* not Japanese. After all this time that I was hoping I'd be able to apply all my Japanese learning to solving this damn riddle... Ah, but I'm still stuck, let's get a bit more.

For 'praise my noble name', this sounds like perhaps you should add BEATRICE in. Battler instead reasons that it has to do with rearranging the letters. He reasons that there must be 11 characters to start with, given that there are 11 'kills' in the riddle (and I guess the 'none left alive') line; or '13' if 'tear apart' means to delete rather than separate. But how can that be? If you delete all the characters, you just have a blank string? Perhaps the lines you generate along the way are somehow meaningful...

As this goes on, Erika continually praises Battler, in a way that is also self-aggrandising: well done for thinking like me.

Outside, player!Battler is annoyed that piece!Battler is getting ahead of him. <span clas="smallcaps">Bernkastel</span> says she was controlling his piece for him at this point in the game. Interesting implications... so in fact Erika's lines are straight up Bernie patting *herself* on the back...

Battler accepts to go along with the revelation of the solution, and instead contemplates Lambda's line that if the riddle wasn't hard, there would be no point to it---something she flags as being a hint in itself. OK, sure. Why come up with a difficult rather than easy riddle? Battler observes that, since Kinzo was already dead, the display of the epitaph might have been by someone else, the person we're calling <span class="smallcaps">Beatrice</span>. He further observes that, by finding the gold, Eva was allowed to survive in the third game, and killed in every other game. He wonders why Beato would create this obscure 'miracle' possibility...

At this point, they give up solving the riddle without knowing what string to insert into the first twilight, so I guess we've just been given some pretty huge hints but not the answer just yet... well, everyone except Battler gives up. If she's just gonna play Battler as the 'detective', why did Bernie even bother introducing Erika..?

Rosa, the last to go upstairs, continues to discuss with Battler; she observes that the last line switches from <ruby lang="ja">黄金郷<rp>, </rp><rt>ougonkyou</rt></ruby> to <ruby lang="ja">黄金の郷<rp>, </rp><rt>ougon no sato</rt></ruby>, changing the reading of the kanji. Hmm, hold on, HOME OF THE GOLD has 13 characters, doesn't it? But no overlap with TAIWAN. Maybe that isn't the key after all... maybe the key is somewhere else related to Taiwan, for example TAIPEI. (Though this doubles up on letters.) A capital city could be a village..?

She also observes that we might have ten positions leading up to the eventual 'home of the gold'. So maybe we need to put the letters we 'kill' in each twilight into a certain order? She also brings up Kyōto in relation to 黄金郷... hey, hold on a minute, KYOUTO has six characters in romaji... In any case, Rosa says she knows where Kinzo grew up and it was 'a long way away', and reasons that it might be a string of places from there to another place.

On his way upstairs, Battler runs into Erika, who unlocks and opens a door. When did she get the keys?

Erika goes into the archive, looking for 'reference material'. She promises she's in it only for the love of the game and won't take the gold for herself.

{% include figure.html src="embed/umineko/ep5/25-tru-gamer.webp" alt="Bernkastel: You're joking. ......I'm only interested in riddle‐solving. I'm only looking for the gold because I want proof that my reasoning was correct. Even if I found it, I wouldn't pocket it for myself, so don't worry." capt="The ultimate gamer." %}

Erika says the book she was looking for is an atlas, and the chapter ends.

---

Well that's a big dose of hints. I think I'd already become convinced of the 'place name' theory after episode 3, but I guess this about cements it. The problem is figuring out a compatible key and targets for deletions. But, OK, how about islands? Let's look at the Ryūkyū Islands, starting at Taiwan. Here are a few...

- Iriomotejima
- Ishigakijima
- Taramajima & Minnajima
- Miyakojima
- Okinawa
- Okinoerabujima
- Tokunoshima
- Amami Oshima
- Kikajima

...but it's really arbitrary which ones I'm counting because there's a bunch of really tiny ones like Suwanosejima that don't even show up until you zoom in ultra far. So this doesn't feel definite enough to be the correct path.

Agh, I feel like with these big hints, I should be able to get it by now. Maybe I'll figure it out by the time of the next liveblog. They're being really cagey about actually saying Kinzo's home outright though, so it seems we are still in the 'hints' stage and they might keep teasing a little longer. Frustratingly, though, the only way to confirm I'm on the right lines is to derive a solution to the whole riddle from it.

And Erika, then! Well, I see why she's so polarising. 'Ultra smug' was not the vibe I would have guessed, but here we go. She's as quirky as the rest of 'em. 'A deduction like this becomes trivial for Furudu Erika' isn't quite so catch as DAME DA, ZENZEN DAME DA or 'flip over the chessboard' but it's got the makings of it. We shall see.