---
title: "The NieR story, part 1: the Cataclysm and the Intoners"
excerpt: "A tour through the Drag-on Dragoon and NieR series and its maze of supplemental materials."
layout: article
categories: nier
tags:
- nier
---

This is a guide to the bizarre, complicated story of _NieR_ and _Drag-on Dragoon_---with *all* their various side materials.

##_Drag-on Dragoon 3_
The events of DoD3 are preceded by the manga _Utahime 5_ (Intoners 5), which Rekka scanlated, and we'll get to that in a minute. However, the game alludes to some earlier events...

### The Cataclysm

The DoD games are set in 'Midgard', but a glance at the world map shows that it's just Europe, flipped 180 degrees. So it's an alternate history - where does it diverge?

According to occasional loading-screen text in _Drakengard 3_, it starts with an event officially translated as 'The Cataclysm'. An earthquake took place in the year 856, heralding the arrival of a city on the Iberian Peninsula.

The _World Inside_ booklet released with the 10th Anniversary Edition of DoD1 elaborates a bit. It's presented as a record made by the character Accord (who we'll get to shortly), and as I understand, it forms the basis for [Rekka's timeline](http://drakengard-3.com/timeline.html). This presents the earthquakes as more widespread; affecting Corinth, Tunisia, Iran and Kyoto.

The mysteriously-appearing city, filled with modern skyscrapers, becomes known as the Cathedral City. It brings with it various magical creatures - notably dragons, such as Michael and Angelus. We are told very little about the world the dragons came from - the only direct glimpse comes from the Michael novella. This was never officially translated, but there are two fan translations - [Rekka's](http://firesanctuary.com/blog/2014/01/05/michael-the-vanishing-ones/) (more exact) and [kho-dazat's](https://drakengard.fandom.com/wiki/Michael/Novella) (more idiomatic).

So, we start with dragons. Three dragons---Michael, an older, somewhat contemptuous Angelus (aka Red), and the unnamed black dragon---are fighting together against enemies that Michael calls 'puppets'. They have been doing so for thousands of years, with no memory of how the battle started - and they have no expectation of finishing. But a 'white light' causes their war to suddenly end.

The next part of the story is dealt with mostly in summary, on the timeline. The arrival of magical creatures in Europe is generally *bad news*. Most of the countries collapse, and surviving nobles retreat into the Cathedral City. There, they establish that magic is real, and they come under the jurisdiction of the Pythagoras Institute, which becomes increasingly a religious order. They start experimenting with 'seal magic', with the occasional accident - the timeline mentions a magician who accidentally turned themselves into a gigantic foot and trampled 2000 people. By the 900s, this Church expands is power to rule most of Midgard. The Church establishes a system of rule managed by 'Lords of the Land' or 'landed lords'.

To skip forward pretty quickly, a series of failed rebellions lead to the magical Church institutions to dwindle, and the Lords of the Land to seize more power and take over magical research. Now and then, 'Seal Magic' is deployed, seemingly requiring large sacrifices each time to contain magical catastrophes.

In 995, 5 years before the start of DoD3, we get the first appearance of the Flower. A woman has some kind of singing-related magical accident, causing an explosion resembling a giant flower.

### Introducing Zero

The earliest part of Zero's story comes in [her novella](https://drakengard.fandom.com/wiki/Zero/Novella#Official%20Translation) **[content note: description of torture, sex work, slavery, sexual violence]**.

When we meet her, she's awaiting execution, alongside a group of revolutionaries. The revolutionaries have been brutally tortured, and in her narration, Zero sneers dismissively at them for placing trust in other people. Zero has escaped the worst of it, because she's no revolutionary and has nothing to hide - she's just a mass murderer who happened to be caught at the same time.

We learn that Zero grew up under an abusive mother, who treated her with little but violence and then sold her to a brothel. Zero got nicknamed Rose by another worker, who she named Indigo in return. (Note that in Rekka's timeline, the Japanese name [Usubeni 薄紅](https://jisho.org/word/%E8%96%84%E7%B4%85) is used instead). Before long, Indigo exploits Zero's help in an escape attempt, then betrays her, leaving her for dead. This leads Zero to conclude she can't trust anyone, and begin her career of mass murder. She slaughters everyone in the brothel, only to get captured by bandits. Giving them the slip hardens her resolve to depend on nobody.

She has a brief life with a thief who was a former client with the brothel, but when he, too, decides to betray her after she contracts a disease called the 'scourge', she murders him as well. We follow her as she murders and robs her way through a series of people, without mercy. It barely seems to affect her, and she wonders in a mild tone why she always kills everyone. "Maybe I kill to find out why."

Eventually, her hundreds of murders catch up with her, and she's captured, whipped, and set for execution. She contrasts herself with the idealistic rebels in the square, and laughs.

> I could hear the girl's voice again: What we did was right. And it was. Only the world could be called wrong—this world full of lords who shit on their people, this world with smug murderers like me. This world where those who stand up on behalf of the weak are crushed like so many worms.

> This is madness. It doesn't make any sense. Ire filled me all at once.

> No. It had always been there and I just hadn't noticed. I hated the world. I had damned it in my mind since before I could remember. I could feel the tremor of a scream in my throat. Glurp. Something warm dribbled from my mouth. It was blood, not a scream. This fucking world is trying to kill me. Fuck that. Fuck the world! Fuck you all! YOU fucking die! Fuck you, fuck you, fuck you! 

As she dies of exposure, Zero catches sight of a 'rose-colored flower' suddenly blossoming in front of her.

### The creation of the Intoners

