---
title: "The NieR story, part 1: real world history"
excerpt: "Introducing a tour through the Drag-on Dragoon and NieR series and its maze of supplemental materials."
layout: article
categories: nier
tags:
- nier
---

This is a guide to the bizarre, complicated story of _NieR_ and _Drag-on Dragoon_---with *all* their various side materials.

## A not-so-brief real-world history

In 2003, *Dragon-on Dragoon* was released for the PS2 by the little-known studio Cavia. A few months later, an English translation was released under the title _Drakengard_.

A project of an underfunded, inexperienced dev, combining a *Dynasty Warriors*-style musou game with railshooter dragonflight sections in the vein of *Panzer Dragoon*, it didn't have much reason to be a hit---and it wasn't! But it found a small, dedicated fanbase, drawn to its comically dark setting, unsettling and dissonant soundtrack, and vivid and awful protagonists.

In the next decade, Yoko Taro directed two more games, continuing the pattern of slightly janky gameplay and strikingly unusual stories.

_NieR: Replicant_ for the PS3 and _NieR: Gestalt_ for the XBox 360 sampled just about every genre of game, from shmups to text adventures, but mostly they were a third-person action-RPG. Originally conceived of as a fairy-tale world, it ended up being a kind of post-apocalyptic sci-fantasy. The story is powerful and tragic, Yoko Taro coming into his own as a writer with a lot of moments that hit your emotions like a train. Like DoD, the cast was unusual and striking - but instead of portraying a group of 'crazy' monsters like in DoD, they are deeply sympathetic outcasts whose situations follow from cruel circumstances. Okabe Keiichi joined on to make the soundtrack, and Emi Evans got involved as the singer, creating a whole 'chaos language' for the project.

Sadly, a combination of kinda dodgy gameplay and a bad landing with critics meant it was, once again, not a hit! But it picked up a small and dedicated fanbase, and created a small franchise of 

At some point after that, Cavia folded and Yoko Taro went to work for Square-Enix directly. _Drag-on Dragoon 3_ was a 10th-anniversy prequel to DoD1, standing somewhere between a character action game and a musou game like the original. (There was a DoD2 as well, but Yoko Taro didn't direct it and it lacks the features that make the series interesting). It took the art direction somewhere a lot more anime than the dourness of the original DoD, going for more 'darkly comic' than 'grimdark'. Taking direct stylistic inspiration from Madoka Magica, it centres on the 'Intoners' (or Utahime), six magical women who can summon monstrous 'angels' through their songs. Of course, this is a DoD game, so things get weird pretty fast. It's most remembered for the beautiful but ridiculously difficult rhythm game that forms the final 'boss' - but more on that later!

DoD3 has a brilliant soundtrack (especially for the intoner battles, and Evans' 'Black Song') and aesthetic. It's got a ton of fantastic moments (funny, tragic and wtf) throughout the story. Sadly, it's let down by extremely repetitive gameplay---you backtrack repeatedly through the same maps, fighting the same bosses over and over!---so once again, it got average reviews and unremarkable sales.

In the process of making the music for DoD3, Yoko Taro got the idea of getting involved in the idol scene ([credit to Rekka Alexiel](http://firesanctuary.com/blog/yorha/) for assembling the info in this para). So Yoko Taro, Okabe Keiichi and Iwasaki Takuya assembled an idol group consisting of vocalists Aino Eri, Ichikura Yuna and Sakurai Tamaki, under the name YoRHa. In the liner notes for their songs for DoD3, Yoko Taro experimented with the concept of androids fighting 'machine life forms' in a distant future. This is how the Automata concert got started...

A couple of years later, Yoko Taro expanded the story of the idol group into a musical stage play, also titled YoRHa. The first run of the play had a tiny budget and limited costumes compared to later runs, but the story and incredible aesthetic carried through.

In 2014, Yoko Taro got another chance to make a game, despite Square Enix's wariness. PlatinumGames, a studio renowned for games like _Bayonetta_ and _Metal Gear Rising_, were very keen to build the gameplay for a NieR game. A bunch of people who worked on _NieR_ headed out to Osaka... and it finally paid off. This time, for once, the game was critically adored for its twisting, emotional plot, the sincere and powerful exploration of existentialism, beautiful music (composed by Keiichi Okabe, with J'NIque Nicole and Emi Evans singing) and of course PlatinumGames-quality gameplay. Despite being a small side project for SquareEnix, the game went on to sell (at time of writing) a good four and a half million copies. NieR finally had mainstream recognition!

Realising they had a hit on their hands, Square Enix finally started spending a little more on NieR. There were a series of concerts featuring short audio dramas, which wrapped up the story of *Automata*; there were short story collections; there was a much higher-budget production of the *YoRHa* stage play and a whole new stage play called Shounen YoRHa.

Yoko Taro himself, meanwhile, became part of the whole marketing effort: he started regularly appearing in promotional videos, conventions etc., playing up a joke character where he's self-effacing, horny, and generally a bit of a troll. He'll say something mildly insulting about the country he's in and an entire concert hall will piss themselves laughing. But he also appears at game developers' conferences, talking a bit about how he wrote NieR, which is worth a watch.

The most recent NieR material at the time of writing is the YoRHa raid in *Final Fantasy XIV*, and the world concert tour which managed to *just* sneak in before the COVID-19 catastrophe hit. And, as of a couple of days ago, a remake of *NieR Replicant* has been announced with Taura of PlatinumGames directing the gameplay, as well as a new mobile game called NieR Reincarnation. We'll see if they keep the streak going.

## What's all this then?

For people who arrived at the series with _Automata_, looking back on the rest of the series - not to mention the side materials - is _a lot_. The games are spread across three consoles, and then you get the side materials: books of short stories such as _Grimoire NieR_, two manga series, novelisations, an audio drama CD, two stage plays, dramatic readings from the music concerts, a raid series in _Final Fantasy XIV_... and unfortunately most of these are only availble in Japanese.

Thanks to various fans and, in particular, Rekka Alexiel's efforts, most of these side materials have been translated into English. As well as having translated a number of the stories herself, Rekka maintains a [detailed timeline](http://nier2.com/timeline.html), and a helpful flowchart to show how all the different parts of the series fit together. For _Automata_ specifically, there is also [The Ark wiki](https://theark.wiki/w/Welcome).

But where do you even begin, and how the hell does it all fit together? The aim of this series is to be a slightly more fleshed out timeline, with links to all the stories and fan translations in context.

So let's begin at the beginning: _Drag-on Dragoon 3_. (It was a prequel, ok...)

##_Drag-on Dragoon 3_
The events of DoD3 are preceded by the manga _Utahime 5_ (Intoners 5), which Rekka scanlated, and we'll get to that in a minute. However, the game alludes to some earlier events...

### The Cataclysm

The DoD games are set in 'Midgard', but a glance at the world map shows that it's just Europe, flipped 180 degrees. So it's an alternate history - where does it diverge?

According to occasional loading-screen text in _Drakengard 3_, it starts with an event officially translated as 'The Cataclysm'. An earthquake took place in the year 856, heralding the arrival of a city on the Iberian Peninsula.

The _World Inside_ booklet released with the 10th Anniversary Edition of DoD1 elaborates a bit. It's presented as a record made by the character Accord (who we'll get to shortly), and as I understand, it forms the basis for [Rekka's timeline](http://drakengard-3.com/timeline.html). This presents the earthquakes as more widespread; affecting Corinth, Tunisia, Iran and Kyoto.

The mysteriously-appearing city, filled with modern skyscrapers, becomes known as the Cathedral City. It brings with it various magical creatures - notably dragons, such as Michael and Angelus. We are told very little about the world the dragons came from - the only direct glimpse comes from the Michael novella. This was never officially translated, but there are two fan translations - [Rekka's](http://firesanctuary.com/blog/2014/01/05/michael-the-vanishing-ones/) (more exact) and [kho-dazat's](https://drakengard.fandom.com/wiki/Michael/Novella) (more idiomatic).

So, we start with dragons. Three dragons---Michael, an older, somewhat contemptuous Angelus (aka Red), and the unnamed black dragon---are fighting together against enemies that Michael calls 'puppets'. They have been doing so for thousands of years, with no memory of how the battle started - and they have no expectation of finishing. But a 'white light' causes their war to suddenly end.

The next part of the story is dealt with mostly in summary, on the timeline. The arrival of magical creatures in Europe is generally *bad news*. Most of the countries collapse, and surviving nobles retreat into the Cathedral City. There, they establish that magic is real, and they come under the jurisdiction of the Pythagoras Institute, which becomes increasingly a religious order. They start experimenting with 'seal magic', with the occasional accident - the timeline mentions a magician who accidentally turned themselves into a gigantic foot and trampled 2000 people. By the 900s, this Church expands is power to rule most of Midgard. The Church establishes a system of rule managed by 'Lords of the Land' or 'landed lords'.

To skip forward pretty quickly, a series of failed rebellions lead to the magical Church institutions to dwindle, and the Lords of the Land to seize more power and take over magical research. Now and then, 'Seal Magic' is deployed, seemingly requiring large sacrifices each time to contain magical catastrophes.

In 995, 5 years before the start of DoD3, we get the first appearance of the Flower. A woman has some kind of singing-related magical accident, causing an explosion resembling a giant flower.

### Introducing Zero

The earliest part of Zero's story comes in [her novella](https://drakengard.fandom.com/wiki/Zero/Novella#Official%20Translation) **[content note: description of torture, sex work, slavery, sexual violence]**.

When we meet her, she's awaiting execution, alongside a group of revolutionaries. The revolutionaries have been brutally tortured, and in her narration, Zero sneers dismissively at them for placing trust in other people. Zero has escaped the worst of it, because she's no revolutionary and has nothing to hide - she's just a mass murderer who happened to be caught at the same time.

We learn that Zero grew up under an abusive mother, who treated her with little but violence and then sold her to a brothel. Zero got nicknamed Rose by another worker, who she named Indigo in return. (Note that in Rekka's timeline, the Japanese name [Usubeni 薄紅](https://jisho.org/word/%E8%96%84%E7%B4%85) is used instead). Before long, Indigo exploits Zero's help in an escape attempt, then betrays her, leaving her for dead. This leads Zero to conclude she can't trust anyone, and begin her career of mass murder. She slaughters everyone in the brothel, only to get captured by bandits. Giving them the slip hardens her resolve to depend on nobody.

She has a brief life with a thief who was a former client with the brothel, but when he, too, decides to betray her after she contracts a disease called the 'scourge', she murders him as well. We follow her as she murders and robs her way through a series of people, without mercy. It barely seems to affect her, and she wonders in a mild tone why she always kills everyone. "Maybe I kill to find out why."

Eventually, her hundreds of murders catch up with her, and she's captured, whipped, and set for execution. She contrasts herself with the idealistic rebels in the square, and laughs.

> I could hear the girl's voice again: What we did was right. And it was. Only the world could be called wrong—this world full of lords who shit on their people, this world with smug murderers like me. This world where those who stand up on behalf of the weak are crushed like so many worms.

> This is madness. It doesn't make any sense. Ire filled me all at once.

> No. It had always been there and I just hadn't noticed. I hated the world. I had damned it in my mind since before I could remember. I could feel the tremor of a scream in my throat. Glurp. Something warm dribbled from my mouth. It was blood, not a scream. This fucking world is trying to kill me. Fuck that. Fuck the world! Fuck you all! YOU fucking die! Fuck you, fuck you, fuck you! 

As she dies of exposure, Zero catches sight of a 'rose-colored flower' suddenly blossoming in front of her.

### The creation of the Intoners

