---
title: "The NieR story, part 2: the branching singularity"
excerpt: "A review of the plot of Drag-on Dragoon 3, and what happens next"
layout: article
categories: nier
tags:
- nier
---

So, to recap the scene after the [previous article](/nier/3-dod-3-part-2), we have the following situation: Zero is infected by a flower that wants to end the world. Her previous suicide attempt created five girls, who became known as Intoners. They can only be killed by a dragon, or a weapon made from a dragon's body.

The Intoners waged a war to overthrow the cruel Lords of the Land, but they're not much better themselves. And Zero, knowing what will happen if they live, attacked and tried to kill her sisters, allied with the dragon Michael. But she was unsuccessful: One's dragon, Gabriel, destroyed her arm and killed Michael.

Michael reincarnated into the child Mikhail, and now, after a year recovering from her wounds, Zero is ready to resume the fight.

## A couple of notes on the game

DoD3 is somewhere between a musou game (i.e. a game like *Dynasty Warriors* where the main character uses special moves to slice through hundreds of weak enemies) and a character action game (i.e. a game like *Devil May Cry* or *Bayonetta* focused on executing stylish combos). The game is split into chapters, each one representing one of the records made by Accord. The big picture described in the previous article is revealed only slowly: at first, all we know is that Zero wants to kill her sisters, supposedly to gain power.

As you progress through the levels, you typically come into an enemy room where you have to kill a set group of enemies to proceed. The levels are largely linear, with a few optional puzzles to get chests and items. The main strength of the game is the enormous amount of dialogue and character interactions: the enemy soldiers express a variety of reactions before they die, your party members have rambling conversations (like 50% about sex), and there's some really well-timed and acted cutscenes for both comic and tragic scenes. By the end, you really feel these characters.

The combat system has four weapon types, each with their own set of combos, but this is in some way foreplay for 'intoner mode': Zero *screams* and starts glowing, lyrics enter the soundtrack, and you become invulnerable as well as ridiculously fast and high-damage using just your hands. There's a very cool feature where, if you're mid-attack-string in intoner mode and your enemy dies, it teleports you to another nearby enemy without skipping a beat. Killing enemies and taking damage fills up the meter you spend on intoner mode, and in a large group of enemies, you can keep it going indefinitely as they die faster than the meter depletes. Even now, it feels pretty great.

The big letdown is the repetitiveness of the levels: you see basically every map over the course of branch A, and later levels send you backwards and forwards through the same maps, occasionally on your dragon, fighting for the most part variants of the same enemies. The game's strongest arc is branch D, which is just an escalating emotional cascade as everything comes together, but to unlock it you have to do some grinding to obtain every weapon. (Thankfully, you do not have to also fully upgrade each one!)

## Branch A

### Chapter 1

Zero wakes up in her house in the Land of Seas, from a dream of Michael's death. The date must be some time in early March, 1000 AD. Now the Flower inside her has started growing out of her right eye...

The Land of Seas is, per the world map, Britain. In the game, it's mostly the same stretch of coastline, patrolled by soldiers in steam-powered battleships and early-modern landing craft.

She emerges to see Mikhail rolling in the mud and pissing himself. It's time to start kiling her sisters again.

Zero sets off, rebuffing Mikhail's suggestions of *talking* to her enemies. She doesn't bother to explain her real motives for killing her sisters just yet, leaning into a villainous persona: it's just for power. (I get this on a meta level, setting up the later twists of Zero's real motivation, but I'm not sure why Zero hides her real purpose from Mikhail at this point.)

As you progress through the level, [a poem](https://drakengard.fandom.com/wiki/Talk:Zero) appears in a kind of very old-timey language. I'm not sure what this was based on in the Japanese, or why the translators affected this style, which is not used elsewhere.

This is a good place to link [Accord's novella](https://drakengard.fandom.com/wiki/Accord/Novella). For the most part, Accord talks about the stories attached to each weapon. (n.b. as the player upgrades a weapon, they get a few sentences more of its story, leading to an ironic or tragic ending. These stories feature in every Drakengard and Nier game.) At the end, she gets ready to open her weapon shop. The player passes this weapon shop midway through Verse 1, leading to a brief conversation...

Zero and Mikhail slaughter their way through the land of seas, making their way to the Shrine occupied by Five. We see their early dynamic... Mikhail desperate to please, and Zero unable to bring herself to acknowledge it because she's still grieving Michael.

Finally, they come face to face with Five and Dito. After exchanging some taunts, Five begins her song. Dito has a little speech for the summoning:

> Behold the Fifth Song:
> Grand Light of Antiquity!
> The great power made manifest!
> The ceremony of glorious arrival...
> Burn into thine eyes the punishing lance of divine retribution!
> I, Dito, summon thee in my name.
> Phanuel, arise!

Phanuel is basically a big crab, and Mikhail makes short work of it. Zero then stabs five so brutally that it gets censored by a Yoko Yukiko drawing, but it's not enough to kill her... not until Dito cuts her in half from behind, no longer bound by the enslaving power of her voice, and then stamps on her corpse...

Thus Zero gains her first Disciple.

### Chapter 2

The next stop is the Land of Mountains, roughly corresponding to western Russia on the world map. As the name suggests, it's a lot of grey rock.

Things proceed pretty much as you'd expect: Four's soldiers, though loyal, are hopelessly outmatched. (The game has a *lot* of incidental soldier dialogue where they encourage each other, beg for mercy, panic etc.) Dito doesn't take long to hit on Zero, who responds rather noncommitally.

The façade starts to break a bit when the party kills a Cerberus (here a fairly common monster in the Intoners' army). One of the Cerberus's heads leaps up and bites Zero's arm off... but rather than die of blood loss, Zero sprouts an enormous flower out of the stump, and from the centre of the flower, a new Zero emerges, completely soaked in blood. "This can't end..." she says, "until all of them are dead."

We also learn that Zero's mechanical arm is attached to her by a parasite, much to Dito's excitement.

The group pursues Four through the mountains, surviving an extensive series of mishaps. They stumble on an enchanted stone circle which describes something about a 'Mt. Berstein of the Vice Norden', better known as Mt. Whatever or Mt. Bersomething.

Four, it ultimately turns out, is on an airship. She tries to play holier-than-thou even til the end. Here's Decadus's summoning speech:

> Behold the Fourth Song:
> Impenetrable Shield of Antiquity!
> The rare power granted to our own...
> The stout citadel that protects us...
> Cast your blighted sins upon these very skies!
> I, Decadus, summon thee in my name.
> Armaros, uphold!

Armaros is a giant flying fortress held aloft by wyverns, surrounded by green magic rings. Mikhail destroys Armaros fairly easily, and Zero boards the airship. She plays on Four's fantasy that there's a nice personality hiding somewhere inside her to extract info about the location of her other sisters, then kills her. Decadus volunteers to die too, but a couple of seconds of Zero making it clear she'll fulfil his own domination fantasy makes him quickly fall in line.

Mikhail, meanwhile, seems to have have evolved to the second stage of dragon life.

*This is where Branch B splits off, but we'll save that for after we've fully covered Branch A.*

### Chapter 3

At this point, the game tries to make you think you'll have an airship to play with.

[video]

You do not.

The airship is shot down almost immediately, dumping Zero in Three's Land of Forests, which roughly corresponds to the Balkans on the world map. Zero immediately goes on a furious rampage.

The forests are home to the faeries, who in the Drakengard universe are, as a rule, absolute dickheads whose main interest is 'pranks' that amount to 'something horrible happens to someone and then I call them an idiot'. We'll see more of them when we get to DoD 1. Zero has no time for it. There's a classic scene where she encounters the King of the Faeries:

[video]

Eventually, they run into Octa. This leads to one of my favourite scenes in the whole game:

[video]

Octa defects, finally having an opportunity to get away from Three and her horrifying human experiments. Or possibly, as he suggests, find an Intoner who will actually fuck him. It could be either, with Octa.

As they approach the Forest shrine, they encounter a series of nonsensical riddle puzzles devised by Three. Next, they enter the "Lost Forest", a misty area full of giant babylike statues.

Finally, they come face to face with Three. She's mostly bored about the thought that Octa betrayed her, but raises all her soldiers as puppets to fight some more. (Soldiers, it is revealed, she fucks.) Then, once they die, she takes control of Octa's mind, forcing him to recite his speech...

> Behold the Third Song:
> Quickened Puppets of Antiquity!
> The raging demon's deathly gaze...
> The army of heretics that rejects the natural cycle...
> Render into ash the powers of reason and order!
> I, Octa, summon thee in my name.
> Armisael, invade!

Armisael turns out to be an army of giant prancing babies, made of soldiers who Three operated on, with glowing purple parts. Mikhail destroys them, and then, just before Zero can finish off Three herself, Mikhail abruptly eats her whole.

Before anyone can process this, Cent shows up, accompanied by Two's angel, Egregori. He grabs Mikhail and leaves... and Zero *finally* uses Mikhail's name.

### Chapter 4

The group now pursue Cent into the Land of Sand, which is roughly in the area of France and Germany (the climate makes about as much sense as any of the others!). Dito, at least, has run into Cent before, but he's not yet aware of what happened to Two.

Mikhail, luckily, isn't far in. But of course he's there as bait, left by Cent. Cent taunts them, and teleports away... so they pursue, cutting through Two's army. Compared to Three's monster army, Two's army emphasises training and employs a lot more magic.

At one point, Zero gets her *other* arm chopped off. She sticks it right back on.

After crossing an absolutely gruelling desert, they finally come face to face wiht Two and Cent. Two, of course, is no longer able to speak. Cent tries to play it off, but Zero figures it pretty quick. "She wasn't fully developed---her body couldn't handle the power of her song", she says.

Cent manages to coax a song (initially, more of a groan) out of Two, and here comes our speech:

> Behold the Second Song:
> Great Fist of Antiquity!
> The blood-wind storms that slash through fate...
> The steely hand that has sworn allegiance...
> Cross the countless swarms of writhing dead!
> I, Cent, summon thee in my name.
> Egregori, dance!

Egregori consists of two large icy blob creatures, covered in armour. Once their armour is removed, they shrink away under dragon fire.

Somehow, the fight causes Mikhail to evolve a second time. In her last moments, Two speaks again, saying the name Michael just before she dies.

Cent immediately surrenders and offers to serve Zero. Any Intoner will do, he tells her...

### Lost Verse 1

The date is April 20, 1000 AD. The gang's all set to go to the Cathedral City and take down One, but first of all, Zero takes a detour back to her house in the Land of Seas. She doesn't mention it, but she's there to see Accord. (There's also a great conversation about food in this level.)

Accord tells her that that she's already doomed on this branch. Zero asks if she's making this all up... and experimentally attacks her. Accord parries it easily with her large suitcase.

### Chapter 5

This time, there's no lengthy hunt. One and Gabriel attack as soon as Zero and Mikhail enter the Cathedral City. The two dragons have a fierce dogfight, with Gabriel sending phantom swords like missiles. Eventually, Gabriel calls in some wyvern backup and flees.

There's some dialgoue from Mikhail that's rather tragic knowing what we do about Gabriella, where he speculates on the bond between One and her dragon. Zero, meanwhile, can't believe One really summoned an angel into her dragon without Disciple support. Foreshadowing her brother...

On foot, Zero storms the same area she fought through in the opening. They climb up to the Cathedral, now overrun with undead and monsters (thanks, we know, to Two's song). The Disciples discuss their hopes for the future, and promise, in each of their ways, to serve Zero to the end...

Then, Zero turns them back into birds. "Disciples can't remain in human form without an Intoner's power," she says... so she'll turn them back before they disappear altogether.

Alone, she climbs the steps to the Cathedral, despite the best efforts of some 90 soldiers. One is waiting, alone in the Cathedral hall.

One has been furiously researching the history of the Cathedral City. Of course, she finds that there's no historical record of the people of the old world. Zero can't wait to start the fight, and One calls Gabriel in, with Mikhail in his jaws.

(The Gabriel fight is bloody difficult by the way. He's invulnerable to ranged attacks and most of his attacks knock you out of the air, and they're very hard to avoid in the narrow space.)

Gabriel, nearing defeat, opens fire with his lasers. Mikhail takes the brunt of it, and explains the deal with dragon resurrection: they have a 'final wish' which they almost always use to reincarnate. But Mikhail... will use it to kill Gabriel.

Zero realises, rather too late, that she actually does give a shit about Mikhail. Zero begs him not to, and finally uses his name to his face. But Mikhail is determined. His wish creates a magic blast which absolutely wrecks Gabriels shit, allowing Zero to finish off the wounded dragon.

Zero turns back to Mikhail's corpse, her work done... only for One's brother to reveal himself at last. He stabs her with the dragonfang sword, and the spray of blood dyes his robe red (recalling the design of a certain DoD1 character, who we'll meet later).

Zero, at last, acknowledges that she had no intention of surviving. Crawling around in a pile of blood (yes, that's a Yoko Taro staple) she thanks Mikhail by name as her last words.

So One's brother is the only survivor. But he's just lost his only confidant in the whole world. He goes on a monologue, breaking down, and promising to make a new religion to protect the world, one which worships the Intoners and especially One. And then he starts calling himself the 'true' One.

Accord shows up, disappointed... another 'failed' branch.

### One's brother's novella

We see the brother's point of view in [his novella](https://drakengard.fandom.com/wiki/One_(Brother%29/Novella). He's hiding in a hidden room in the Cathedral with stained glass windows, where he once waited for the day when Zero would attack. He dreams of creating a religion in One's name, and has a dialogue with an imaginary One in the mirror. But One is dead.

We learn that One, like Zero, intended to eradicate the Flower. If she managed to kill Zero, she would have her brother kill her with the dragonbone sword. (If they'd only talked, everyone could get their suicides with much less stress...)

We also learn that, despite dialogue in One's DLC where she told him it would be inappropriate, they fucked.

Slowly, One's brother convinces himself to play the role of One. The hidden room is discovered, and he declares his plan to create a new church, to worship the Intoners and the Angels they summoned...

### Where Branch A leads...

We'll stop following Branch A for now. You could be forgiven, given the significance of the Cult of the Watchers/Church of the Angels in DoD1, for thinking that this route leads to the DoD1 timeline. In fact, it doesn't: it leads to a timeline explored in the manga *Shi ni Itaru Aka* (variously translated as *The Red Unto Death* or *The Fatal Crimson*), and the novel *Drag-on Dragoon 1.3*. Although sharing many events with the game, this is a separate timeline. We'll discuss *Shi ni Itaru Aka* and DoD 1.3 in the next article in this series.

## Branch B

At this point, Accord finally reveals herself to the player. She explains the "multiple world divergence phenomenon" arising from "singularities" such as Zero. She seems to be looking for another branch which might end a bit better: apparently it's not enough for the world to be saved from the Flower, she wants Zero herself to survive.

Branch B diverges shortly after Octa joins the party, on April 1, 1000 AD. Like in Branch A, you're in the Land of Forests, but this time something is very much up. Cent is somehow already in your party, but he has no memory of Two---not even her name, though he can't stop thinking about the mysterious absence. The forest, meanwhile is now full of a strange poison fog, and all the faeries who tormented the party the first time through have vanished.

Before long, they meet an army of Armisael puppets. How could these have been summoned without Octa? Then, Three herself shows up, and announces that there are crying voices and something *wrong* with the forest. One, she says, holds the secret, elsewhere in the forest. And she disappears, leaving nothing but a pile of Armisael heads.

As Zero progress through the forest, she suddenly loses her connection Mikhail. Not long after, she gets ambushed by three powerful enemies, forcing her to once again regenerate through her flower. But she's attacked again mid-regeneration, pinning her to a wall, and control passes to a riderless Mikhail. The three Disciples discuss whether to run away as Zero finishes her regeneration, naked and covered in blood.